." Manpage for csvcut.
." Contact gati.gergely@gmail.com to correct errors or typos.
.TH csvcut 1 "23 Mar 2024" "1.0" "csvcut man page"
.SH NAME
csvcut \- select and process columns from CSV files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B csvcut
[-f list | -r list] [-H] [-s] [-q] [-o csv|json|xml] [-d delim] [-D output-delim] [-c field/args:cmd] [file ...]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B csvcut
is a tool for selecting and processing columns from CSV files.
It parses input as a CSV-formatted text file following RFC 4180, with the exception that line endings are based on the system default.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.BI "-f " fields
Select specific fields. This can be a single range or multiple ranges separated by commas.
This option cannot be used together with the \-r option.
A range can be specified using the following forms:

.RS
.TP
N
The N'th field (1-based indexing).
.TP
N\-
The N'th field and all fields following it.
.TP
N\-M
Fields between the N'th and M'th positions, inclusive.
.TP
\-M
All fields from the first to the M'th.
.RE

.TP
.BI "-r " fields
Select and reorder fields. Ranges follow the same format as described for the \-f option.
This option allows an additional column designator, the plus sign ('+'), which adds a new empty column to the output.

It is also possible to combine multiple columns using the following operators:

.RS
.TP
.B '^'
Select the longest value from the specified columns (e.g., "2^5^7").
.TP
.B '*'
Concatenate the specified columns into one (e.g., "2*5*7").
.RE

This option will reorder the input columns according to the specified ranges. Columns can appear multiple times in the output. This option cannot be used together with the \-f option.

.TP
.B -H
Skip the first row of the output, which is typically the header row in CSV files. This option is implicitly enabled when using output formats other than CSV.

.TP
.B -s
Preserve the first row without processing it. No callout commands are applied to the first row.

.TP
.B -q
Do not add quotes in the output, even when they would normally be required.

.TP
.BI "-d " delim
Specify a delimiter for the input CSV. The default delimiter is a comma (',').

.TP
.BI "-D " delim
Specify a delimiter for the output CSV. The default is a comma (','). This option is ignored for non-CSV output formats.

.TP
.BI "-o " format
Specify the output format. The default format is 'csv'. Available formats:

.RS
.TP
.B csv
Standard CSV output.
.TP
.B json
JSON output. Requires input with a header row. The \-H option is implicitly enabled.
.TP
.B xml
XML output. Requires input with a header row. The \-H option is implicitly enabled.
.RE

.TP
.BI "-c " field:command
For the specified field, execute the given command. The command's standard output replaces the original field value.

Two ranges can be specified, separated by a forward slash ('/').
- The first range selects the fields to be processed (must be a single field or range).
- The second range specifies additional fields to be passed as arguments to the command.

This option can be used multiple times for different fields. The following arguments are passed to the command:

.RS
.TP
1
Column number in the input.
.TP
2
Column number in the output.
.TP
3
Field name from the header row.
.TP
4
Current field value.
.TP
5+
Additional arguments from the second range.
.RE

.TP
.B -h
Display a summary of command-line arguments and exit.

.SH EXAMPLES

.B Example 1:

Process specific columns and use external commands for transformations:

.RS
.nf
$ csvcut -H -f 1-3,5,9- -c 2-3/6,8-9:pf_1 -c 5/2,4:pf_2 input.csv
.fi
.RE

This command processes 'input.csv', outputs columns 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, and the rest, and applies transformations to the 2nd, 3rd, and 5th fields while omitting the header.

When processing the 3rd field, the 'pf_1' executable will receive the following arguments:

.RS
.TP
1
Input column number (3).
.TP
2
Output column number (3).
.TP
3
Field name (from the 3rd field of the first row).
.TP
4
Current value of the 3rd field.
.TP
5
Value of the 6th field.
.TP
6
Value of the 8th field.
.TP
7
Value of the 9th field.
.RE

The command output will be used as the new value for the 3rd field.

The 5th column is similarly processed by the 'pf_2' executable with the 2nd and 4th columns as extra arguments.

.SH SEE ALSO
.B cut(1), jq(1), xmllint(1)

.SH BUGS
No known bugs.

.SH AUTHOR
Gergely Gati (gati.gergely@gmail.com)

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2024 Gergely Gati
.P
BSD-3-Clause license
